Add page for java time + write introduction (#740)
MicroEJ/docs: ApplicationDeveloperGuide/javaTime.rst

.. _chapter.java_time:

Date and Time
=============

Introduction
------------

Java developers have long used the ``Date``, ``Calendar`` and ``TimeZone`` classes for handling date and time. 

> With JSR310, Java 8 introduced a more advanced and comprehensive Date and Time API that goes beyond simply replacing ``Date`` or ``Calendar``. 

Reviewer: can we say a bit about the footprint? the library looks heavy / not suited for the smallest targets but maybe i'm wrong and it's not much more heavy than EDC classes

more generally, when is it recommended to use this library? in all cases, or in which cases?

Author: Yes, in most cases it comes at a higher cost in ROM size (i have some comparison examples in the associated ticket). But there are a lot of usecases that you just can't do out of the box with EDC, so this is a trade-off between feature and footprint.
 I have not tested RAM usage. I have tested the performances (legacy vs new) and the result depends on the usecase. 
Calendar and TimeZone are deprecated and Date has very few features. I would say that using Java time is recommended in every usecases that involve date and time operations (easier to write/read, lot of built-in features) and time zone support. If you stick to basic timestamp manipulation or minimalist/lightweight applications then `System.currentTimeMillis()` can be enough.
I can add a paragraph about this.

Reviewer: ok, i think your paragraph

>  using Java time is recommended in every usecases that involve date and time operations (easier to write/read, lot of built-in features) and time zone support. If you stick to basic timestamp manipulation or minimalist/lightweight applications then System.currentTimeMillis() can be enough.

would be great in the doc (in introduction?)

Author: done

The API has many methods, but it remains easy to handle because it sticks to consistent method prefixes:

- ``of``: static factory method.
- ``get``: gets a value.
- ``is``: checks if some condition is true.
- ``with``: equivalent to a setter for immutable objects, returns a copy with the specified argument set.
- ``plus``: adds an amount to an object.
- ``minus``: subtracts an amount from an object.
- ``to``: converts this object to another type.
- ``at``: combines this object with another. 

Usage
-----

The Date and Time API is provided as an Add-on Library.

To use the ``time`` library, add the following to the project build file:

.. tabs::

   .. tab:: Gradle (build.gradle.kts)

      .. code-block:: java

         implementation("ej.library.eclasspath:time:1.0.0")

   .. tab:: MMM (module.ivy)

      .. code-block:: xml

         <dependency org="ej.library.eclasspath" name="time" rev="1.0.0"/>

Examples
--------

This section presents a series of small, focused examples that demonstrate various aspects of the Java Date and Time API. 

Instant
~~~~~~~

The ``Instant`` class is the closest equivalent of ``Date``. It represents a specific instant in time.

> The following snippet shows how to create an instant from the factory methods and perform basic operations on instants.

Reviewer: this is the only time that you introduce a snippet. i think we should either introduce every snippet or introduce none of them

Author: ok, fixed

        LocalDateTime pastDateTime = now.minusMonths(2).minusMinutes(15); // Subtracting 2 months and 15 minutes from
                                                                        	// now
        // Displaying the results of operations
        System.out.println("Date and Time 30 days and 3 hours from now: " + futureDateTime);
        System.out.println("Date and Time 2 months and 15 minutes ago from now: " + pastDateTime);

        // Displaying date and time fields
        System.out.println("Year: " + now.getYear());
        System.out.println("Month: " + now.getMonth());
        System.out.println("Day of Month: " + now.getDayOfMonth());
        System.out.println("Hour: " + now.getHour());
        System.out.println("Minute: " + now.getMinute());
        System.out.println("Second: " + now.getSecond());
        System.out.println("Day of Year: " + now.get(ChronoField.DAY_OF_YEAR));
        System.out.println("Day of Week: " + now.get(ChronoField.DAY_OF_WEEK));
        
        // Displaying comparison results
        System.out.println("Is specificDateTime after current date and time? " + specificDateTime.isAfter(now));

> Duration

Reviewer: maybe Duration, Period and ZoneId could be introduced in Overview?

        // Displaying period fields
        System.out.println("Years: " + period.getYears());
        System.out.println("Months: " + period.getMonths());
        System.out.println("Days: " + period.getDays());

        // Creating Period instances using factory methods
        Period customPeriod = Period.of(2, 3, 5); // 2 years, 3 months, and 5 days

        // Displaying the custom period
        System.out.println("Custom Period: " + customPeriod);

        // Performing operations on periods
        Period addedPeriod = period.plus(customPeriod); // Adding periods
        Period subtractedPeriod = period.minus(customPeriod); // Subtracting periods

        // Displaying the results of operations
        System.out.println("Added Period: " + addedPeriod);
        System.out.println("Subtracted Period: " + subtractedPeriod);

        // Comparing Period instances
        boolean isEqual = customPeriod.equals(Period.of(2, 3, 5)); // Check if customPeriod is equal to 2 years, 3 months, and 5 days

        // Displaying comparison results
        System.out.println("Is customPeriod equal to 2 years, 3 months, and 5 days? " + isEqual);

Time Zone Support
-----------------

> The library does not use the class ``TzdbZoneRulesProvider`` as the default provider for time zone rules (see :ref:`Restrictions <time_restrictions>`).

Reviewer: i suggest to add a small paragraph before to explain what is a timezonerules provider

Author: you're right, i added it.

Instead, the library comes with a default provider which is very lightweight and simple that knows only the rules for the zone "GMT". 
Any attempt to use another zone ID will throw a ``ZoneRulesException`` because the ID is unknown.

> For example,

Reviewer: i suggest to merge "for example" with the previous paragraph to explain that the snippet illustrates the default timezonerules provider

Author: fixed

.. code-block:: java

    // Displaying available time zones - will list a single item: "GMT"
    Set<String> timeZones = ZoneId.getAvailableZoneIds();

>         for (String timeZone : timeZones) {

Reviewer: fix indentation

Author: fixed

            System.out.println(timeZone);
    }

    // Creating ZonedDateTime instance - will throw a ZoneRulesException
    ZonedDateTime specificDateTime = ZonedDateTime.of(2023, 7, 15, 14, 30, 0, 0, ZoneId.of("Europe/Dublin")); // July 15, 2023, 2:30 PM in Dublin

    // Creating ZoneId instance from a region ID - will throw a ZoneRulesException 
    ZoneId tokyoTimeZone = ZoneId.of("Asia/Tokyo");

> However, the user can define a custom default provider for loading time zone rules.

Reviewer: can you provide an example which provides actual time zones ?

Author: do you mean a custom provider example?
I added one

Reviewer: i meant one with actual data, but now i know it is not implemented yet. it is explained well in the restrictions

Handling Time Zones
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

.. tabs::

   .. tab:: Legacy Time API

      .. code-block:: java

        TimeZone timeZone = TimeZone.getTimeZone("America/New_York");
        Calendar calendar = Calendar.getInstance(timeZone);
        Date dateInNewYork = calendar.getTime();

   .. tab:: New Time API

      .. code-block:: java

        ZoneId zoneId = ZoneId.of("America/New_York");
        ZonedDateTime zonedDateTime = ZonedDateTime.now(zoneId);

.. _time_restrictions:

Restrictions
------------

The library's goal is to offer Application developers an API that closely mirrors the one found in Java SE 8.
However, we had to make the library compatible with both pre-Java 8 features and the constraints found in embedded devices.
Here are the items where the backport differs from its Java 8 counterpart:

- Non-ISO chronologies are not present (`Hijrah`, `Japanese`, `Minguo`, `ThaiBuddhist`). The overwhelming majority of applications use the ISO calendar system. Applications still have the option to introduce their own chronologies.
- No formatting or parsing methods (methods ``parse``, ``format``, ``getDisplayName``, ``ofLocale``).

> - The default zone-rules provider is not ``TzdbZoneRulesProvider``. This provider loads zone rules from a local TZDB database and it consumes a significant amount of RAM. We plan to add this support in a specific Add-on Library at a later time.

Reviewer 2: Ok, but what is the default zone-rules provider? Where does the default zone ids (e.g. "America/New_York") come from? Or there are no defaults and it expects a user supplied database, in which case mention it and an example should be provided

Author: I modified the paragraph Time Zone Support to better explain this.

The IDs are defined by the TZDB group (IANA) and are commonly used by Java developers. I do not cover this because this is explained in the javadoc and online documentation.

As you know, the provider based on TZDB database is not yet ready so we will introduce it when it will be available.

Reviewer 2: Perfect, thanks

.. _Duration: https://repository.microej.com/javadoc/microej_5.x/apis/java/time/Duration.html
.. _Period: https://repository.microej.com/javadoc/microej_5.x/apis/java/time/Period.html
.. _Date: https://repository.microej.com/javadoc/microej_5.x/apis/java/util/Date.html
.. _Calendar: https://repository.microej.com/javadoc/microej_5.x/apis/java/util/Calendar.html
.. _TimeZone: https://repository.microej.com/javadoc/microej_5.x/apis/java/util/TimeZone.html
.. _ZoneRulesException: https://repository.microej.com/javadoc/microej_5.x/apis/java/time/zone/ZoneRulesException.html
.. _ZoneRulesProvider: https://repository.microej.com/javadoc/microej_5.x/apis/java/time/zone/ZoneRulesProvider.html
.. _ZoneId: https://repository.microej.com/javadoc/microej_5.x/apis/java/time/ZoneId.html
.. _ZoneOffset: https://repository.microej.com/javadoc/microej_5.x/apis/java/time/ZoneOffset.html
.. _IANADatabase: https://www.iana.org/time-zones

Date and Time
=============

Introduction
------------

Java developers have long used the `Date`_, `Calendar`_ and `TimeZone`_ classes for handling date and time. 

> Java 8 introduced a more advanced and comprehensive Date and Time API that goes beyond simply replacing `Date`_ or `Calendar`_. 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Java SE 8 introduced a more advanced and comprehensive Date and Time API that goes beyond simply replacing `Date`_ or `Calendar`_. 
```

It provides a complete time model for applications.

> There are many benefits of moving to the new API:

Reviewer 3: 2014 is not really "new":
```suggestion
There are many benefits of moving to this API:
```
or
```suggestion
There are many benefits of using the latest:
```

* Immutability: types are immutable, making thread-safe code easier to write and less prone to bugs (due to no mutable state).
* Improved API design: it offers an intuitive and developer-friendly design that better addresses the challenges of date and time manipulation. Application code is also easier to read and understand.
* Simplified date and time arithmetic: the API introduces methods for common date and time operations, simplifying tasks like adding or subtracting days, months, or years.
* Precision: it provides more precise representations for date and time values, including support for nanoseconds, which is important for applications requiring high precision.
* Comprehensive time model: it introduces new classes that deal with different concepts of time such as date without a time or time without a date, durations or periods.

> In general, it's a good practice to use the Java Time API when dealing with date, time, and time zone-related operations because of its convenient features and extensive capabilities.

Reviewer 3: Maybe highlight the term ?
```suggestion
In general, it's a good practice to use the ``Java Time API`` when dealing with date, time, and time zone-related operations because of its convenient features and extensive capabilities.
```

The Date and Time API is provided as an Add-on Library.

> To use the `time <https://repository.microej.com/modules/ej/library/eclasspath/uri/>`_ library, add the following to the project build file:

Reviewer: wrong lib (though time is not published yet)

Author: fixed

      .. code-block:: java

        public long computeDifference(Date date1, Date date2){
            return date1.getTime() - date2.getTime();
        }

   .. tab:: New Time API

      .. code-block:: java

        public long computeDifference(LocalDateTime date1, LocalDateTime date2){
            return Duration.between(date1, date2).toMillis();
        }
        

Calculating the Day of the Week
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

.. tabs::

   .. tab:: Legacy Time API

      .. code-block:: java

>         // Create a Calendar instance

Reviewer: fix indent

Author: fixed

		Calendar calendar = Calendar.getInstance();

		// Set a date (e.g., October 15, 2023)
		calendar.set(2023, Calendar.OCTOBER, 15);

		// Get the day of the week as an integer (1 = Sunday, 2 = Monday, ..., 7 = Saturday)
		int dayOfWeek = calendar.get(Calendar.DAY_OF_WEEK);

   .. tab:: New Time API

      .. code-block:: java

>         // Create a LocalDate instance for a specific date (October 15, 2023)

Reviewer: fix indent

Author: fixed
